[ENG-29956] feat: add edge sql reference (#926)
aziontech/docs: src/content/docs/en/pages/main-menu/reference/store/edge-sql/edge-sql.mdx

---
title: Edge SQL

> description: Explore Edge SQL, a distributed database solution by Azion. Learn to manage databases, run queries, and ensure data resilience effortlessly.

Reviewer: A description ficou mais de guide

> description: Explore Edge SQL, a distributed database solution by Azion. Learn to manage databases, run queries, and ensure data resilience effortlessly.

Author: ```suggestion
description: Explore Edge SQL, a distributed database solution by Azion. It allows you to manage databases, run queries, and ensure data resilience effortlessly.
```

> description: Explore  Edge SQL, a distributed database solution by Azion. Learn to manage databases, run queries, and ensure data resilience effortlessly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Explore Edge SQL, a distributed database solution by Azion. Learn to manage databases, run queries, and ensure data resilience effortlessly.
```

meta_tags: edge sql, sql, database, distributed, queries
namespace: docs_edge_sql
permalink: /documentation/products/store/edge-sql/
---

import Badge from '~/components/Badge.astro'
import Button from '~/components/Button.astro'

<Badge variant="accent">

>   Preview

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Preview
```

</Badge>

> **Edge SQL** is a Store product that allows you to create and manage distributed database services with low latency. Fully ACID-compliant, Edge SQL is built on top of a database powered by libSQL and works while being replicated across Azion edge nodes. A database created on Edge SQL is stored in two types of instances: a **main** instance and its **replicas**.

Author: ```suggestion
Azion **Edge SQL** is an edge-native SQL solution designed for serverless applications. It's fully ACID-compliant and utilizes SQLite's SQL dialect to provide a familiar development environment, facilitating fast integration. Azion Edge SQL implements a Main/Replicas architecture to enable ultra-low latency querying at the network edge, enhancing performance for distributed applications.
```

> With Edge SQL, you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Edge SQL, you can perform different tasks, including:
```

- Store real-time telemetry data, ideal for IoT.
- Manage inventory of distributed e-commerce/retail distribution centers.
- Store and analyze access logs, quickly identifying and mitigating security attacks.
- Store and manage access data.

> There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to write on a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to write on a database.
```

> There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to write on a database.

Reviewer 3: Edge Functions não irão fazer escrita nesse primeiro momento, apenas leitura nas réplicas.

> There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to write on a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to read data from a database.
```

> There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to read data from a database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways to build a database through Edge SQL: using the Edge SQL REST API or writing an edge function. The REST API allows you to create, read, update, delete, and list databases. An edge function allows you to retrieve data from a database.
```

### Implementation

| Scope | Resource |
| ----- | -------- |

> | Manage databases with REST API | []() |
> | Create queries | []() |
> | Write on a database with an edge function | []() |

Author: ```suggestion
| Manage databases | [How to create an Edge SQL database]() |
| Create queries | [ How to create and query data on Edge SQL]() |
```

> | Write on a database with an edge function | []() |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Write on a database with an edge function | [How to interact with Azion Edge SQL with Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/how-to-interact-db-edge-functions/) |
```

---

## Business rules

Writing databases, through REST API or edge function, is only possible in the [main instance](#main-instance). All [replicas](#replicas) are read-only.

:::caution[warning]

> Once you delete a main instance, this action can't be undone. You'll still be able to read the replicas, but won't be able to write on them.

Author: ```suggestion
Once you delete a main instance, this action can't be undone. You'll no longer be able to write or read on that database.
```

> | Write on a database with an edge function | [How to interact with Azion Edge SQL through Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/how-to-interact-db-edge-functions/) |

Reviewer 3: Todos esses pontos que falam sobre escrever databases com Edge Functions, precisam ser corrigidos.

> | Write on a database with an edge function | [How to interact with Azion Edge SQL through Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/how-to-interact-db-edge-functions/) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Read data from a database with an edge function | [How to interact with Azion Edge SQL through Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/how-to-interact-db-edge-functions/) |
```

> Writing databases, through REST API or edge function, is only possible in the [main instance](#main-instance). All [replicas](#replicas) are read-only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Writing databases, through REST API or an edge function, is only possible in the [main instance](#main-instance). All [replicas](#replicas) are read-only.
```

> | Read data from a database with an edge function | [How to interact with Azion Edge SQL through Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/how-to-interact-db-edge-functions/) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Retrieve data from a database | [How to retrieve data from a database with Edge SQL and Edge Functions](/en/documentation/products/guides/edge-sql/retrieve-data-with-edge-functions/) |
```

:::

> During the creation of a database, especially your first one, there's a propagation time for it to be created on the edge nodes. Your `POST` request response will exhibit a `creating` state, and you can run `GET` requests to check once it's created.

Reviewer: for it to be replicated on the edge nodes OR  for it to be propagated on the edge nodes ?

> During the creation of a database, especially your first one, there's a propagation time for it to be created on the edge nodes. Your `POST` request response will exhibit a `creating` state, and you can run `GET` requests to check once it's created.

Author: ```suggestion
During the creation of a database, especially your first one, there's a propagation time for it to be propagated on the edge nodes. Your `POST` request response will exhibit a `creating` state, and you can run `GET` requests to check once it's created.
```

You can also use a JavaScript edge function to query and analyze if the snapshots have been merged into replicas.

<Button href="guidelink" text="go to analyze snapshots guide" variant="secondary"></Button>

:::note
if you receive a `creation_failed` state, try creating the database again or contact the [support team](/en/documentation/services/support/#service-channels) to check.
:::

---

## Data resilience

> With a distributed architecture running across Azion edge nodes, Edge SQL guarantees data is kept safe and available. Your data is created in a main instance and propagated through replicas across Azion edge nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a distributed architecture running across Azion's edge nodes, Edge SQL guarantees data is kept safe and available. Your data is created in a main instance and propagated through replicas across Azion edge nodes.
```

---

## Databases

A database is a set of structured tables that allow to write and read data in SQL language. Organized in columns and rows, users are able to add data logically, with columns representing specific information in the vertical axis, while rows represent individual entry data, related to a column, in the horizontal axis.

> [Creating a database](guidelink) is the first step to use Edge SQL and add data:

Author: ```suggestion
[Creating a database](/en/documentation/products/guides/manage-databases-edge-sql/) is the first step to use Edge SQL and add data:
```

```bash

> curl --location 'https://stage-edge-sql-api.azion.net/edge-sql/api/databases' \

Author: ```suggestion
curl --location 'https://api.azion.com/v4/edge_sql/databases' \
```

--header 'Authorization: Token [TOKEN VALUE]' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{
   "name": "my-database"
}'
```

<Button href="apilink" text="create a database with Azion API" variant="secondary"></Button>
<br> </br>

<Button href="guidelink" text="create a database with edge functions" variant="secondary"></Button>

### Query

A query is how you structure your table or a search on rows on a previously created database. It's possible to query based on relations and constraints.

For example, to create a table via cURL:

```bash

> curl --location 'https://stage-edge-sql-api.azion.net/edge-sql/api/databases/{id_database}/query' \

Author: ```suggestion
curl --location 'https://api.azion.com/v4/edge_sql/databases/{id_database}/query' \
```

--header 'Authorization: Token [TOKEN VALUE]' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{
    "statements": [
        "CREATE TABLE users (id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, name TEXT NOT NULL);"
    ]
}'
```

> To query data on the already create table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To query data on the already created table:
```

```bash

> curl --location 'https://stage-edge-sql-api.azion.net/edge-sql/api/databases/{id_database}/query' \

Author: ```suggestion
curl --location 'https://api.azion.com/v4/edge_sql/databases/{id_database}/query' \
```

--header 'Authorization: Token [TOKEN VALUE]' \
--header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
--data '{
    "statements": [
        "SELECT * FROM users;"
    ]
}'
```

<Button href="apilink" text="create a query with Azion API" variant="secondary"></Button>
<br> </br>

> <Button href="guidelink" text="go to create a query guide" variant="secondary"></Button>

Author: ```suggestion
<Button href="/en/documentation/products/guides/create-tables-edge-sql/" text="go to create a query guide" variant="secondary"></Button>
```

---

## Instances

### Main instance

> The primary storage instance, it receives all *write* commands and synchronizes the received data with the replicas.

Author: ```suggestion
The primary storage instance, it receives all *write* commands and synchronizes the received data with the replicas. It also allows *read* actions.
```

> All databases](#databases) are created and all [queries](#query) are written on the main instance. After the automatic process handled by Azion, your data is processed on edge locations, snapshots are created, and merged into replicas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All databases](#databases) are created and all [queries](#query) are written on the main instance. After the automatic process handled by Azion, your data is processed on edge locations, and snapshots are created and merged into replicas.
```

> The primary storage instance, it receives all *write* commands and synchronizes the received data with the replicas. It also allows *read* actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary storage instance. It receives all the *write* commands and synchronizes the received data with the replicas. It also allows *read* actions.
```

> All databases](#databases) are created and all [queries](#query) are written on the main instance. After the automatic process handled by Azion, your data is processed on edge locations, and snapshots are created and merged into replicas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All [databases](#databases) are created and all [queries](#query) are written on the main instance. After the automatic process handled by Azion, your data is processed on the edge locations, and snapshots are created and merged into replicas.
```
